.TH bcc 1 "Nov, 1997"
.BY Bruce Evans
.nh
.SH NAME
bcc \- Bruce's C compiler
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bcc
.RB [ -03EGNOPSVcegvwxW ]
.RB [ -Aas_option ]
.RB [ -Bexecutable_prefix ]
.RB [ -Ddefine ]
.RB [ -Uundef ]
.RB [ -Mc_mode ]
.RB [ -o\ outfile ]
.RB [ -ansi ]
.RB [ -Ccc1_option ]
.RB [ -Pcpp_option ]
.RB [ -Iinclude_dir ]
.RB [ -Lld_option ]
.RB [ -Ttmpdir ]
.RB [ -Qc386_option ]
.RB [ -ttext_segno ]
.RB [ ld_options ]
.RB [ infiles ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Bcc
is a simple C compiler that produces 8086 assembler, in addition compiler
compile time options allow 80386 or 6809 versions. The compiler understands
traditional K&R C with just the restriction that bit fields are mapped to
one of the other integer types.

The default operation is to produce an 8086 executable called
.B a.out
from the source file.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -ansi
Pass the C source through
.B unprotoize
after preprocessing and before code generation. This will allow
.I some
ansi C to be compiled but it is definitly
.B NOT
a true ansi-C compiler.
.TP
.B -0
8086 target (works on 80386 host, but not 6809)
.TP
.B -3
80386 target (may work on 8086 host, but not 6809)
.TP
.B -A
pass remainder of option to assembler (e.g. -A-l -Alistfile for a listing)
.TP
.B -B
prefix for executable search path (as usual; the search order is all paths
specified using
.BR -B ,
in order, then the path given in the environment variable
.B BCC_EXEC_PREFIX
if that is set, then the compiled-in defaults
(something like /usr/lib/bcc/ followed by /usr/bin/)
.TP
.B -C
pass remainder of option to bcc-cc1, see code generation options.
.TP
.B -D
preprocessor define
.TP
.B -E
produce preprocessor output to standard out.
.TP
.B -G
produce GCC objects (Same as -Mg)
.TP
.B -Ixyz
include search 'xyz' path
.TP
.B -I
don't add default include to search list
.TP
.B -Lxyz
add directory name 'xyz' to the head of the list of library directories searched
.TP
.B -L
don't add default library to search list
.TP
.B -Md
alters the arguments for all passes to produce MSDOS executable COM files.
These are small model executables, use
.B -i
to get tiny model.
.TP
.B -Mf
sets bcc to pass the
.B -c
and
.B -f
arguments to the code generator for smaller faster code. Note this code is
not compatible with the standard calling conventions so a different version
of the C library is linked too.
.TP
.B -Mc
sets bcc to pass the
.B -c
argument to the code generator for smaller faster code. Note the standard
libc is normally transparent to this, but there are exceptions.
.TP
.B -Ms
alters the arguments for all passes and selects C-library
to produce standalone Linux-86 executables
.TP
.B -Ml
switches to i386-Linux code generator and library.
This configuration accepts the
.B -z
flag to generate QMAGIC a.out files instead of the normal OMAGIC.
.TP
.B -Mg
switches to i386-Linux code generator and generates OMAGIC object files
that can be linked with some versions of gcc; unfortunatly the most recent
versions use 'collect2' to link and this crashes.
.TP
.B -N
makes the linker produce a native a.out file (Linux OMAGIC) if combined
with -3 the executable will run under Linux-i386.
.TP
.B -O
optimize, call
.BR copt ( 1 )
to optimize 8086 code. Specifiers to choose which rules 
.B copt
should use can be appended to the
.B -O
and the option can be repeated.
.TP
.B -P
produce preprocessor output with no line numbers to standard output.
.TP
.B -Q
pass full option to c386 (Only for c386 version)
.TP
.B -S
produce assembler file
.TP
.B -T
temporary directory (overrides previous value and default; default is
from the environment variable TMPDIR if that is set, otherwise /tmp)
.TP
.B -U
preprocessor undefine
.TP
.B -V
print names of files being compiled
.TP
.B -X
pass remainder of option to linker (e.g. -X-Ofile is passed to the linker
as -Ofile)
.TP
.B -c
produce object file
.TP
.B -f
turn on floating point support, no effect with i386, changes libc library
with 8086 code.
.TP
.B -g
produce debugging info (ignored.)
.TP
.B -o
output file name follows (assembler, object or executable) (as usual)
.TP
.B -p
produce profiling info (ignored.)
.TP
.B -t1
pass to the assembler to renumber the text segment for multi-segment programs.
.TP
.B -v
print names and args of subprocesses being run.  Two or more -v's print
names of files being unlinked.  Three or more -v's print names of paths
being searched.
.TP
.B -w
Supress any warning diagnostics.
.TP
.B -W
Turn
.B on
assembler warning messages.
.TP
.B -x
don't include crt0.o in the link.
.TP
.B -i
don't pass
.B -i
to the linker so that it will create an impure executable.
.P
Other options are passed to the linker, in particular -lx, -M, -m, -s, -H.

.SH CODE GENERATOR OPTIONS
These are all options that the code generator pass
.B bcc-cc1
understands, only some will be useful for the
.B -C
option of bcc.
.TP 
.B -0
8086 target (works even on 80386 host, not on 6809)
.TP 
.B -3
80386 target (may work even on 8086 host, not on 6809)
.TP 
.B -D
define (as usual)
.TP 
.B -E
produce preprocessor output (as usual)
.TP 
.B -I
include search path (as usual)
.TP 
.B -P
produce preprocessor output with no line numbers (as usual)
.TP 
.B -c
produce code with caller saving regs before function calls
.TP 
.B -d
print debugging information in assembly output
.TP 
.B -f
produce code with 1st argument passed in a register (AX, EAX or X)
.TP 
.B -l
produce code for 2 3 1 0 long byte order (only works in 16-bit code),
a special library of compiler helper functions is needed for this mode.
.TP 
.B -o
assembler output file name follows
.TP 
.B -p
produce (almost) position-independent code (only for the 6809)
.TP 
.B -t
print source code in assembly output
.TP 
.B -w
print what cc1 thinks is the location counter in assembly output
.P
All the options except -D, -I and -o may be turned off by following the
option letter by a '-'.  Options are processed left to right so the last
setting has precedence.

.SH PREPROCESSOR DEFINES
The preprocessor has a number of manifest constants.
.TP
.B __BCC__ 1
The compiler identifier, normally used to avoid compiler limitations.
.TP
.B __FILE__
stringized name of current input file
.TP
.B __LINE__
current line number
.TP 
.B __MSDOS__ 1
compiler is configured for generating MSDOS executable COM files.
.TP 
.B __STANDALONE__ 1
compiler is configured for generating standalone executables.
.TP 
.B __AS386_16__ 1
compiler is generating 16 bit 8086 assembler and the
.B #asm
keyword is available for including 8086 code.
.TP 
.B __AS386_32__ 1
compiler is generating 32 bit 80386 assembler and the
.B #asm
keyword is available for including 80386 code.
.TP 
.B __CALLER_SAVES__ 1
compiler calling conventions are altered so the calling function must save the
.I SI
and
.I DI
registers if they are in use (ESI and EDI on the 80386)
.TP 
.B __FIRST_ARG_IN_AX__ 1
compiler calling conventions are altered so the calling function is passing
the first argument to the function in the
.I AX
(or
.I EAX
)
register.
.TP 
.B __LONG_BIG_ENDIAN__ 1
alters the word order of code generated by the 8086 compiler.
.P
These defines only occur in the 6809 version of the compiler.
.TP 
.B __AS09__ 1
compiler is generating 6809 code
.TP 
.B __FIRST_ARG_IN_X__ 1
the first argument to functions is passed in the
.I X
register.
.TP 
.B __POS_INDEPENDENT__ 1
the code generated is (almost) position independent.
.P
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B BCC_EXEC_PREFIX
default directory to seach for compiler passes
.TP
.B TMPDIR
directory to place temporary files (default /tmp)
.P
.SH DIRECTORIES
All the include, library and compiler components are stored under the
.I /usr/bcc
directory under Linux-i386, this is laid out the same as a
.I /usr
filesystem and if bcc is to be the primary compiler on a system it should
be moved there. The configuration for this is in the
.B bcc.c
source file only, all other executables are independent of location.

The library installation also creates the file
.BR /usr/lib/liberror.txt ,
this path is hardcoded into the C library.

The 
.B bcc
executable itself,
.B as86
and
.B ld86
are in /usr/bin.

.SH SEE ALSO
as86(1), ld86(1), elksemu(1)
.SH BUGS
The bcc.c compiler driver source is very untidy.

The linker, ld86, produces a broken a.out object file if given one input and
the
.B -r
option this is so it is compatible with pre-dev86 versions.
